.TH ABCTAB2PS 1 "18. May 2007"
.\"
.\"
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH NAME
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
\fBabctab2ps\fP \- typesets music in abc format directly in postscript
.\"
.\"
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
abctab2ps [-1bcEhHIlnNopPx] 
[-a \fIalfa\fP] [-B \fIbarsperline\fP] 
[-d \fIdistance\fP] [-D \fIfmtdir\fP]
[-eCRST \fIselectors\fP] [-f \fIinfile\fP] 
[-F \fIformatfile\fP] [-g shrink|space|stretch|fill]
[-k \fInbars\fP] [-m \fImargin\fP] [-paper \fIformat\fP]
[-noauthor] [-notab] [-nofrenchtab] [-noitaliantab] [-nogermantab]
[-O \fIoutfile\fP] [-s \fIscale\fP]
[-t \fItransposition\fP]
[-tabsize \fIfontsize\fP] [-transposegchords]
[-v \fIverbosity\fP] [-V \fIvoices\fP]
[-w \fIwidth\fP] [-X \fIstrictness\fP]
[\fIinfile\fP[.abc]]
.\"
.\"
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
\fBabctab2ps\fP reads an input file containing music in abc format
and typesets it directly in PostScript.
For a description of the abc syntax, please see the separate user's guide.
.PP
Basically, the usage is \fIabctab2ps file1 file2 ...\fP 
where file1, file2 ... are the abc input files. This will write the
Postscript output to the file \fIOut.ps\fP; for a different filename
use flag -O. If no input file is specified, abctab2ps reads its input
from stdin so that you can pipe the output of some other abc tool into
abctab2ps.
.PP
Note that most flags (see OPTIONS) can be used in any sequence. 
However, the position does matter for flags e,f,C,S,R,T since
these determine how the following arguments are interpreted.
.PP
Flags can be contracted together if the meaning is clear, 
and a numerical argument for the last flag can be appended.
That is, "-b -s 0.7 -v 1" can be contracted to "-bs0.7 -v1".
.\"
.\"
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
.TP
.B -1
writes every tune on a separate page.
.TP
.B -a \fIalfa\fP
set the maximal amount of permitted shrinking to \fIalfa\fP,
where 0 <= \fIalfa\fP <= 1. A value of 0.0 means that no 
shrinking is allowed, and a value of 1.0 allows shrinking until 
the symbols are almost touching. In conjunction with -c, by default alfa 
is set to an intermediate value (displayed with "abctab2ps -c -h"). 
When -c is not used, maximal shrinking and stretching are allowed.
.TP
.B -b
break at all line ends, even if they end with the continuation 
symbol "\\".
.TP
.B -B \fIbarsperline\fP
try to typeset with \fIbarsperline\fP bars on each line.
.TP
.B -c
consider the input as one long line, ie., implicitly append 
the continuation symbol '\\' to every line of music.
When doing automatic line breaking with -c, the user can control the 
spacing of the symbols along the staff by specifying the "compression 
parameter" alfa with the -a flag.  
.TP
.B -d \fIdistance\fP
set staff distance to \fIdistance\fP (cm/in/pt).
.TP
.B -D \fIfmtdir\fP
look for format files in directory \fIfmtdir\fP.
.TP
.B -e \fIselector1 [selector2 ...]\fP
typesets only the tunes matching the xref numbers \fIselector1 
[selector2 ...]\fP. 
Optionally, the search can be done on other fields using in place of -e
the flags -R (seaches the rhythm field), -C (searches the composer field),
-S (searches the source field), -T (seaches the title field (default)).
.TP
.B -E
make EPSF (encapsulated postscript) output. Each tune is then put into 
a separate file with a correct bounding box and no page breaks.
.TP
.B -f \fIinfile\fP
sets the input file. Has the same effect as omitting this flag.
.TP
.B -F \fIformatfile\fP
read format from file \fIformatfile\fP.fmt. The directory can be set
with flag -D.
.TP
\fB-g\fP shrink|space|stretch|fill
sets the "glue mode".
The default mode is fill, which fills the staff.
This flag is useful when changing the layout parameters, 
to see what effect the changes have for each mode separately.
.TP
.B -h
quick help, equivalent to "abctab2ps" without any arguments.
This also shows the default settings for some parameters.
.TP
.B -H
show the default format parameters.
.TP
.B -I
write index file "Ind.ps".
.TP
.B -k \fInbars\fP
number every \fInbars\fP. To number every first bar per staff, set
\fInbars\fP to 0.
.TP
.B -l
print in landscape mode.
.TP
.B -m \fImargin\fP
sets the left margin to \fImargin\fP (cm/in/pt).
.TP
.B -maxs \fInsymbols\fP
obsolete option for different memory allocation.
No longer necessary because memory is now allocated dynamically.
.TP
.B -maxv \fInvoices\fP
obsolete option for different memory allocation.
No longer necessary because memory is now allocated dynamically.
.TP
.B -noauthor
suppresses the postscript DSC comment for the author (%%For).
Useful when abctab2ps is run automatically on a webserver or when
you do not want your name listed in the ouput file.
.TP
.B -notab
suppresses all tablature specific postscript routines and fonts
in the output file; useful for music only input, because the 
resulting output file is smaller. Basically, \fIabctab2ps\fP should
behave like \fIabc2ps\fP with this option.
.TP
.B -nofrenchtab
does not include the font for french tab into the output
file; useful if you only use a different tab, because the
resulting output file is smaller.
.TP
.B -noitaliantab
does not include the font for italian tab (and other number based
tabs) into the output file; useful if you only use a different tab,
because the resulting output file is smaller.
.TP
.B -nogermantab
does not include the font for german tab into the output
file; useful if you only use a different tab, because the
resulting output file is smaller.
.TP
.B -n
includes historical notes and other stuff at the bottom 
of each tune.
.TP
.B -N
write page numbers
.TP
.B -o
obsolete option that is ignored. In abc2ps, only with this option 
postscript output was generated.
.TP
.B -O \fIoutfile\fP
in PS (EPS) mode, the output is written to \fIoutfile\fP.ps
(\fIoutfile\fP001.eps). If the parameter to -O is '=', output 
for "foo.abc" is written to "foo.ps" ("foo001.eps").
.TP
.B -p
generates pretty output, with more whitespace between tunes,
larger fonts for titles, and larger music symbols. By default, 
the layout squeezes the tunes to reduce the number of pages.
.TP
.B -P
another pretty output format.
.TP
.B -paper \fIformat\fP
sets paper format. Typical values for \fIformat\fP are "a4" or "letter".
This command line option overrides the system-wide default papersize
given in \fI/etc/papersize\fP.
For a list of all possible values try an invalid value for \fIformat\fP;
this will also print the default papersize on your system.
.TP
.B -s \fIscale\fP
scales the music output by factor \fIscale\fP.
.TP
.B -t \fItransposition\fP
transpose all music. If \fItransposition\fP is a number, the music
is transposed up as many halftones; for downward transposition start 
the number with an underscore "_". If \fItransposition\fP is a note name, 
this note becomes the root.
.TP
.B -tabsize \fIfontsize\fP
sets the size of the tablature font TabFont to \fIfontsize\fP.
.TP
.B -transposegchords
transpose guitar chords too (in combination with option -t), 
in case you use guitar chords actually for chord letters
.TP
.B -v \fIverbosity\fP
sets the verbosity for output to the screen to \fIverbosity\fP.
Hereby -v0 gives very little, -v1,v2,v3.. show successively 
more information. Verbosity >= 10 is for debugging.
.TP
.B -V \fIvoices\fP
select specified voices, eg. "-V 1,4-5"
.TP
.B -w \fIwidth\fP
sets the width of the staff to \fIwidth\fP (cm/in/pt).
.TP
.B -x
includes the xref numbers in the tune title.
.TP
.B -X \fIstrictness\fP
set strictness for note spacing; 0 < \fIstrictness\fP < 1.
.\"
.\"
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
.TP
.B ABCTABFONTS
Semicolon separated list of directories which abctab2ps searches
for tablature font files. If unset, fonts files are searched in
\fI/usr/share/abctab2ps\fP, \fI/usr/local/share/abctab2ps\fP and \fIfonts\fP
(in that order) on Unix/Win32/MacOs X and in \fI:fonts\fP on MacOs 8/9.
Please note that the separator is a semicolon ";" rather than a colon ":".
This is necessary because colons are part of path names on MacOs and Win32. 
.TP
.B PAPERSIZE
Sets the default paper format (\fIa4\fP or \fIletter\fP); overrides 
entry in \fI/etc/papersize\fP.
.TP
.B PAPERCONF
Full path to a file containing the default paper size (\fIa4\fP or 
\fIletter\fP).
If unset, \fI/etc/papersize\fP is used.
.\"
.\"
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH FILES
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
.TP
.B /etc/papersize
Contains the name of the system-wide default paper size (\fIa4\fP or 
\fIletter\fP). A different file can be given with the environment variable
\fIPAPERCONF\fP.
.\"
.\"
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLES
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
Typeset all tunes from mytunes.abc into Out.ps, choosing all line 
breaks automatically:
.PP
\	\fCabctab2ps mytunes.abc -c\fP
.PP
Squeeze notes together more and write the output to
mytunes.ps:
.PP
\	\fCabctab2ps mytunes.abc -O '=' -c -a0.9\fP
.PP
Equivalent commands to typeset tunes 1 to 10 in bla.abc and 11-20 
in fasel.abc:
.PP
\	\fCabctab2ps bla -e 1-10 -f fasel -e 11-20 \fP
.PP
\	\fCabctab2ps bla.abc 1-10 fasel.abc 11-20 \fP
.PP
\	\fCabctab2ps bla 1-10 fasel.abc 11-20 \fP
.PP
Typeset all tunes with the string 'House' in the title or with
xref numbers 10-12, in all abc files whose name starts with X,
including historical notes and xref numbers in the output, 
forcing a line break at continuation lines, with reduced size
of the symbols, putting one tune per page:
.PP
\	\fCabctab2ps X*.abc -e House 10,11,12 -nx -s0.9 -b1\fP
.\"
.\"
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH BUGS
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
abctab2ps currently has a number of hard coded limits:
.IP -
Info fields must not exceed 300 characters
.IP -
file names must not exceed 100 characters
.IP -
the size of an output page is limited
.PP
If you encounter a limit, you currently need to change the hard coded
value in \fIabctab2ps.h\fP and recompile.
.\"
.\"
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
Christoph Dalitz <christoph(dot)dalitz[at]hs-niederrhein(dot)de>
.\"
.\"
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH VERSION
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
This man page describes abctab2ps version 1.8.1 from May 2007.
This version is built on Michael Methfessel's abc2ps 1.3.3 from December 1998.
.\"
.\"
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH COPYRIGHT
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
Copyright 1999-2007 by Christoph Dalitz
.PP
abctab2ps is supplied "as is" without any warranty. It
is free software and can be used, copied, modified and
distributed without fee under the terms of the GNU General 
Public License. 
.\"
.\"
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SEE ALSO
.\"---------------------------------------------------------------------
abcselect(1)
